Manipulating files is only useful if you can locate the file you need.
This step will walk you through two commands that are useful for this,
`+locate+` and `+find+`.

The `+find+` command is great for searching for files which satisfy some
specified criteria. This step will show an example using the filename,
but you can also use it to look for files with certain permissions,
empty files, or much more.

[source,bash]
----
find / -name messages
----

The output is the full path to the file. If there are multiple matches,
then this output would have multiple lines and it would be up to the
user to decide which is the appropriate file. Instead of having to
search through countless directories, you can quickly locate the file.

____
_Note:_ An in-depth explanation of using `+find+` to sort by file
permissions is included in the
https://lab.redhat.com/file-permissions[File Permissions Basics lab].
____

`+find+` can be input/output intensive, which can sap system resources,
especially if you run a search that will scan a large amount of
candidate files. In fact, the search above is exactly that kind of
search, since it is looking for filenames starting from the root
directory. It will check every single file on the entire system to see
if it is a match. The `+locate+` command instead queries a database to
avoid being too I/O intensive.

[source,bash]
----
locate messages
----

This command finds a variety of files containing _messages_ in their
name, including the log file that you are looking for,
`+/var/log/messages+`. The database that `+locate+` uses to optimize the
search process is updated once per day by default, so that means if you
are trying to locate a newly created file it will not be present in the
database.

____
[!NOTE] `+locate+` returns matches based on partial matches to
_messages_ where `+find+` returned exact matches. To have `+find+`
return the same set of partial matches, you can add the `+*+` glob
character to on either side of the filename you are looking for. For
example, `+find / -name *messages*+` should return the same list as
`+locate messages+`. For more information on available patterns for
either tool, you can refer to their man pages.
____

Create a new file with `+touch+`:

[source,bash]
----
touch newFile
----

Try to find this newly created file using `+locate+`:

[source,bash]
----
locate newFile
----

There will be no output, as _newFile_ is not in the `+locate+` database.
Update the `+locate+` database using the `+updatedb+` command:

[source,bash]
----
updatedb
----

Re-run the `+locate+` command to look through the newly updated
database:

[source,bash]
----
locate newFile
----

Now the file is present. This is important to keep in mind so that you
do not run into the frustrating situation where `+locate+` failed to
find a file that existed all along.
